---
title: "A classification of mental tasks"
date: 2023-09-21T23:20:14-04:00
draft: true
description: 
---

I've come up with a classification of the kinds of activities we do that you may
find interesting. I think you may find this classification satisfying and an
interesting lens to view the world. it can also provide some perspective on
different types of education and art.

the idea is that the _process_ and the _outputs_ of a task can each be
classified as "convergent" or "divergent". (quotes because this is a new use for
these words.) a convergent process is when there are restrictive rules for the
steps you take, whereas in a divergent process you can do anything you want. A
task with a convergent output is meant to create or achieve something specific,
whereas a divergent output means you can end up with anything you want. this
gives us four categories in total, which I will call divdiv, divcon, condiv, and
concon for short, based on whether the process and the output respectively are
convergent or divergent. (maybe I should use a different choice of words...
tight and loose? light and toose...)

now for some examples. a concon task is what you might be assigned in a
highschool math or science class: here's the method, here's the inputs, get the
right answer. a divcon task is what an engineer or sports coach might do: the
device your designing can work however you want internally as long as it gets
the job done. a coach has full freedom over the strategy their team uses, but
the only requirement is that it has to win.

a divdiv task is what's typically considered art (disclaimer: this is not an
attempt to define art). a condiv task could be if you set yourself a rule and
then try to create something that looks cool. for example, you could draw a
picture on a sheet of graph paper only using the diagonals of the squares,
producing a cool looking pattern. condiv processes usually produce things that
look cool but are questionably art. things like line drawings and splatter paint
would be condiv too, because your setting yourself an interesting limit on your
method then seeing what you can create.

I think that this distinction could help explain what many people find
frustrating about modern art, as modern art is often condiv. things like
painting a whole canvas a solid color can feel cheap because the interest isn't
coming from the artists inspiration or something internal, but rather from a
limit that the artist chose to place on themself. there still is plenty of room
for creative expression even after setting yourself this limit, but like with
autotuned vocals a certain human element is removed. This doesn't mean that the
work is worse or not art, just as autotuned vocals aren't necessarily worse than
clean vocals.

I think that breaking a task down into it's process, outputs, and sometimes it's
inputs can be interesting in other ways too. I often find that looking at deep
learning can help me understand the human mind better. a neural network is
essentially a function that takes an input and combines it with some parameters
called weights to produce an output. here the weights are a sort of
manifestation of the process into numbers. so here again we see the same
breakdown of tasks that we've been using. (although we didn't think about the
convergence/divergence of the inputs to a task. I think the above analysis could
be extended to inputs, but this is less interesting. it also doesn't always
apply. for example you could draw a picture that isn't a picture of anything,
and a generative neural net doesn't take any input beyond noise.)

I think that the act of appreciating art is the act of infering the process (and
sometimes the inputs) from the outputs. we see a painting which doesn't look
like a photograph of the input, yet somehow still does look like the input. and
so this painting is showing us something about the pieces that make up a thing's
visual identity. a cubist painting may look nothing like a photograph of a face
yet still be distinctly a face, and so it shows us how the artist saw a face and
from that visual pulled out the broad form while leaving behind the texture and
the color and the exact shape.
